Armsmear was the home of manufacturing pioneer <a href='https://connecticuthistory.org/people/samuel-colt/' target='_blank'>Samuel Colt</a> and his family. Colt built the palatial estate on the western edge of his <a href='https://connecticuthistory.org/towns-page/hartford/' target='_blank'>Hartford</a> property following his marriage to <a href='https://connecticuthistory.org/elizabeth-jarvis-colt-born-today-in-history/' target='_blank'>Elizabeth Jarvis</a> in 1856. The architect is unknown, but landscape architects Cleveland and Copeland designed the extensive grounds, which included ponds, fountains, a deer park, and greenhouses filled year-round with fruits and flowers.<br><br>The house was described in an 1876 publication as "an Italian villa in stone, massive, noble, refined, yet not carrying out any decided principle of architecture, it is like its originator, bold and unusual in its combinations." While one corner of the house was dominated by an Italianate tower, there were also Turkish-style domes and ornamentation.<br><br>Inside, the "picture-gallery," which also served as a ballroom, housed works of art and cases containing jewels and valuable gifts presented to Colt by foreign dignitaries, as well as the cradle made from wood of the famous <a href='https://connecticuthistory.org/connecticuts-the-legend-of-the-charter-oak/' target='_blank'>Charter Oak</a> for Samuel and Elizabeth's first-born son.<br><br>Samuel Colt <a href='https://connecticuthistory.org/sam-colts-funeral-the-day-hartford-stopped-2/' target='_blank'>died in 1862</a> and was buried on the Armsmear grounds. Elizabeth later moved Samuel's remains and those of four of their children (also buried on the grounds) to Cedar Hill Cemetery. In accordance with Elizabeth's will, the house became a home for widows and dependents of Episcopal clergymen after her death in 1905. Elizabeth bequeathed the grounds and gardens of the estate to the City of Hartford to form the 140-acre Colt Park. Armsmear was listed as a National Historic Landmark in 1976.<br><br>Learn more about <a href='https://connecticuthistory.org/samuel-colt-from-yankee-peddler-to-american-tycoon/' target='_blank'>Samuel Colt</a><br><br>Visit <a href='https://www.nps.gov/colt/index.htm' target='_blank'>Coltsville National Historic Park</a>


Armsmear was the home of manufacturing pioneer Samuel Colt and his family. Colt built the palatial estate on the western edge of his Hartford property following his marriage to Elizabeth Jarvis in 1856. The architect is unknown, but landscape architects Cleveland and Copeland designed the extensive grounds, which included ponds, fountains, a deer park, and greenhouses filled year-round with fruits and flowers.

The house was described in an 1876 publication as "an Italian villa in stone, massive, noble, refined, yet not carrying out any decided principle of architecture, it is like its originator, bold and unusual in its combinations." While one corner of the house was dominated by an Italianate tower, there were also Turkish-style domes and ornamentation.

Inside, the "picture-gallery," which also served as a ballroom, housed works of art and cases containing jewels and valuable gifts presented to Colt by foreign dignitaries, as well as the cradle made from wood of the famous Charter Oak for Samuel and Elizabeth's first-born son.

Samuel Colt died in 1862 and was buried on the Armsmear grounds. Elizabeth later moved Samuel's remains and those of four of their children (also buried on the grounds) to Cedar Hill Cemetery. In accordance with Elizabeth's will, the house became a home for widows and dependents of Episcopal clergymen after her death in 1905. Elizabeth bequeathed the grounds and gardens of the estate to the City of Hartford to form the 140-acre Colt Park. Armsmear was listed as a National Historic Landmark in 1976.

_blank
